OSASINFRA-3066: Added migration procedure for Kuryr SDN. (#54822)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/nw-kuryr-cleanup.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/ovn_kubernetes_network_provider/migrate-from-kuryr-sdn.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="nw-kuryr-cleanup_{context}"]
= Cleaning up resources after migration

> After migration is done, there are necessary steps to clean up resources used by Kuryr. From high level perspective it will include:

Reviewer: I'd change "used" to "created".

* Removing Kuryr finalizers from resources:
* Removing Kuryr CRDs
* Removing {rh-openstack-first} resources

.Prerequisites

* Install the OpenShift CLI (`oc`).
* Install `jq` tool
* Install Python interpreter
* Install `openstacksdk` python package
* Install `openstack` cli tool
* Access to the underlying {rh-openstack}
* Access to the cluster as a user with the `cluster-admin` role.

.Procedure

. Find out cluster and Kuryr related identifiers, which will be used later:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ CLUSTERID=$(oc get infrastructure.config.openshift.io cluster -o=jsonpath='{.status.infrastructureName}')
$ CLUSTERTAG="openshiftClusterID=${CLUSTERID}"
$ ROUTERID=$(oc get kuryrnetwork -A --no-headers -o custom-columns=":status.routerId"|head -n 1)
----

. Create helper bash function, which will help out with removing finalizers
from specified resources. It might look complicated, but it simply gets two
parameters - first one is name of the resource, and the second is the
finalizer to be removed. Than it will get all the desired resource from the
cluster and replace it's definition with the same data excluding specified
finalizer.
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ function REMFIN {

Reviewer 2: To reduce the chances of certain step being skipped or done wrongly, what do you think about having a list of resource in this function that we could iterate over and apply the necessary k8s actions and openstack actions that the specific resource requires?

Reviewer 2: @gryf Are the steps of each resource removal supposed to happen in the order listed specified in the docs?
If yes, can we mention in the docs that the user must follow the order

Author: Ah, right. The order is important.

Author: Actually, the steps are presented as ordered list. Should we explicitly say, that order should be maintained? @maxwelldb WDY?

Reviewer 3: Nah. Using ordered lists to indicate a particular order is understood in the docs. @gryf

    local resource=$1
    local finalizer=$2
    for res in $(oc get $resource -A --template='{{range $i,$p := .items}}{{ $p.metadata.name }}|{{ $p.metadata.namespace }}{{"\n"}}{{end}}'); do
        name=${res%%|*}
        ns=${res##*|}
        oc get -n $ns $resource $name -o json |
            jq -Mcr "if .metadata.finalizers != null then del(.metadata.finalizers[] | select(. == \"${finalizer}\")) else . end" |

>             oc replace -n $ns $resource $name -f -

Reviewer: We could have it retry on conflict, but in general just running it again is safe. We should just mention that it's idempotent and you should try again on conflict errors.

    done
}
----
. Remove Kuryr finalizers from services:
+
[source,terminal]

> ----

Reviewer 2: should we follow the same pattern Kuryr follows of first deleting the openstack resource, then removing finalizer for kuryr CR and then finalizer from native Kubernetes resource?

Reviewer: The process is designed with 2 assumptions:
* Minimize the effect on core Kubernetes resources (mainly allow Pods and Services to be deleted; Namespaces need to wait a bit more) ASAP.
* Only delete CRDs once we deleted all the OpenStack resources these CRDs are necessary to identify. E.g. we don't care about KuryrPorts too much because we can delete ports by networks. Similarly even if Service is gone we can delete LBs using tags.

That's why it's not following the same pattern as in kuryr-controller.

        args+=("--subport $sub")
    done
    if [ ${#args[@]} -gt 0 ]; then
        openstack network trunk unset ${args[*]} $trunk
    fi
done
----
. Get all networks and subnets from KuryrNetwork CRs and remove ports, router interfaces and network itself:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ mapfile -t kuryrnetworks < <(oc get kuryrnetwork -A --template='{{range $i,$p := .items}}{{ $p.status.netId }}|{{ $p.status.subnetId }}{{"\n"}}{{end}}')
$ i=0
$ for kn in "${kuryrnetworks[@]}"; do
    i=$((i+1))
    netID=${kn%%|*}
    subnetID=${kn##*|}
    echo "Processing network $netID, ${i}/${#kuryrnetworks[@]}"
    # Remove all ports from the network.
    for port in $(python -c "import openstack; n = openstack.connect().network; print(' '.join([x.id for x in n.ports(network_id='$netID') if x.device_owner != 'network:router_interface']))"); do
        ( openstack port delete $port ) &

        # Only allow 20 jobs in parallel.
        if [[ $(jobs -r -p | wc -l) -ge 20 ]]; then
            wait -n
        fi
    done
    wait

    # Remove the subnet from the router.
    openstack router remove subnet $ROUTERID $subnetID

    # Remove the network.
    openstack network delete $netID
done
----

> . Remove Kuryr service network:

Reviewer 2: Perhaps this could at the step that deletes services as this is related to services

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/ovn_kubernetes_network_provider/migrate-from-kuryr-sdn.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="nw-kuryr-cleanup_{context}"]
= Cleaning up resources after migration

> After migration is done, there are necessary steps to clean up resources created by Kuryr. From high level perspective it will include:
> 
> * Removing Kuryr finalizers from resources
> * Removing Kuryr CRDs
> * Removing {rh-openstack-first} resources

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After migration completes, you can clean up resources that Kuryr created by:

* Removing Kuryr finalizers from resources
* Removing Kuryr CRDs
* Removing {rh-openstack-first} resources
```
What is "from resources" referring to here?

Author: by "finalizers from resources" here I have OCP resources like pods, services etc in mind.

.Prerequisites

* Install the OpenShift CLI (`oc`).

> * Install `jq` tool

Reviewer 3: We don't typically allow `jq` in the official docs. Can we work around this?

Author: Well, that's a bummer, as we heavily relay on that tool.

Author: ok, I figure that out, and remove it from the requirements.

* Install Python interpreter

> * Install `openstacksdk` python package

Author: Actually no, there are limitations for openstack CLI tool, so that it was easier to incorporate python oneliners.

        openstack network trunk unset ${args[*]} $trunk
    fi
done
----

. Get all networks and subnets from KuryrNetwork CRs and remove ports, router interfaces and network itself:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ mapfile -t kuryrnetworks < <(oc get kuryrnetwork -A --template='{{range $i,$p := .items}}{{ $p.status.netId }}|{{ $p.status.subnetId }}{{"\n"}}{{end}}')
$ i=0
$ for kn in "${kuryrnetworks[@]}"; do
    i=$((i+1))
    netID=${kn%%|*}
    subnetID=${kn##*|}
    echo "Processing network $netID, ${i}/${#kuryrnetworks[@]}"
    # Remove all ports from the network.
    for port in $(python -c "import openstack; n = openstack.connect().network; print(' '.join([x.id for x in n.ports(network_id='$netID') if x.device_owner != 'network:router_interface']))"); do
        ( openstack port delete $port ) &

        # Only allow 20 jobs in parallel.
        if [[ $(jobs -r -p | wc -l) -ge 20 ]]; then
            wait -n
        fi
    done
    wait

    # Remove the subnet from the router.
    openstack router remove subnet $ROUTERID $subnetID

    # Remove the network.
    openstack network delete $netID
done
----

. Remove Kuryr security group
+
[source,terminal]
----

> openstack security group delete ${CLUSTERID}-kuryr-pods-security-group

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
$ openstack security group delete ${CLUSTERID}-kuryr-pods-security-group
```

Author: ack

----

. Remove all tagged subnetpools and remove them:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ for subnetpool in $(openstack subnet pool list --tags $CLUSTERTAG -f value -c ID); do
    openstack subnet pool delete $subnetpool
done
----

. Check for all the networks based on KuryrNetwork CRs are removed. This command will give you list of still existing networks, otherwise it should return no output.
+
[source,terminal]
----

> networks=$(oc get kuryrnetwork -A --no-headers -o custom-columns=":status.netId")

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
$ networks=$(oc get kuryrnetwork -A --no-headers -o custom-columns=":status.netId")
```

Author: ack!

> for existingNet in $(openstack network list --tags $CLUSTERTAG -f value -c ID); do

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
$ for existingNet in $(openstack network list --tags $CLUSTERTAG -f value -c ID); do
```

Author: ack

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/ovn_kubernetes_network_provider/migrate-from-kuryr-sdn.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="nw-kuryr-cleanup_{context}"]
= Cleaning up resources after migration

After migration from the Kuryr network plugin to the OVN-Kubernetes network plugin completes, clean up the resources that Kuryr created previously. 

.Prerequisites

* You installed the {product-title} CLI, `oc`.
* You installed a Python interpreter.
* You installed the `openstacksdk` Python package.
* You installed the `openstack` CLI.
* You have access to the underlying {rh-openstack} cloud.
* You can access the cluster as a user with the `cluster-admin` role.

[NOTE]
====

> At the time of writing when OCP16 is used, it includes ancient version of

Reviewer 2: nit openstack 16.2?

which specific 16.2 version was used? 16.2.4? Was it with Red Hat openstack?

Author: RHEL 8.4 and RH OSP 16.2 snapshot from around end of March.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At the time of writing when Red Hat OpenStack 16.2 is used, it includes ancient version of
```

Reviewer 3: Is this resolved?

`openstacksdk` package, that does not support tags for Octavia objects. It is
recommended to use either workstation with modern operating system with newer
version of `openstacksdk` package or `virtualenv` and install appropriate
version from link:https://pypi.org[pypi].
====

> .Setup virtualenv

Reviewer 3: This added virtualenv content should either be a new module or an optional step 1 in the procedure that follows it. Would you like me to do it? @gryf

Author: I guess optional step will serve here better than separate module.

Reviewer 3: @gryf Noticed this isn't broken out yet. My inclination is to remove it unless it is absolutely necessary. We typically don't include "if you decide" sorts of information in a procedure. 

If it is necessary, it should become the first few steps of the `.Procedure`.

Reviewer 4: I think it is good to have the virtualenv.
In my case, during the verification of this procedure, the 16.2 [latest cdn](http://rhos-qe-mirror-tlv.usersys.redhat.com/rcm-guest/puddles/OpenStack/16.2-RHEL-8/latest_cdn/COMPOSE_ID) didn't include a proper openstacksdk version, so a virtualenv with the correct Packages was needed.

[0] https://redhat-internal.slack.com/archives/CH98TDJUD/p1679991410225769?thread_ts=1679919862.338489&cid=CH98TDJUD

Reviewer 3: @imatza-rh @gryf In that case, my preference is to require venv for this procedure. 

Have you run this part of the procedure past Support? They're typically not keen on requiring much package installation. :\

Reviewer 3: FYI @sferich888 -- is what's proposed in L20-L63 okay? Can't seem to find prior uses of venv in the docs, and I assume there might be a reason for it.

Reviewer 5: Its fine. However all this is really doing is installing the `openstack` command/cli (and ensuring that you can run it); I think explaining that better in the prerequisites is key to understanding that by putting you in a virtual environment; the version/packages we install here don't conflict with system packages or other python packages (that you may be using). 

virtual environment are a best practices (and I recommend using one here); but not strictly required.

If you decide to use virtualenv, here is a quick guidance how to proceed.
At the time of writing, minimal versions of the following OpenStack components
has been used to fulfill cleaning procedure:

> - openstacksdk 0.54.0

Author: Yes. Tags for Octavia started to be supported in OpenStackSDK 0.24.0, although after that release there were some significant improvement made around Octavia tls/pools/AZ and Neutron bulk SG creation.

- python-openstackclient 5.5.0
- python-octaviaclient 2.3.0

Newer versions should also work, although there is a tiny chance for
incompatibilities. If you have issues, either downgrade to version mentioned
above or consult individual component documentation and/or changelog for
details.

To set up cleanup environment, create virtualenv, update pip and install needed
components:

[source,terminal]
----
$ python3 -m venv /tmp/venv
$ source /tmp/venv/bin/activate
(venv) $ pip install pip --upgrade
(venv) $ pip install openstacksdk==0.54.0 python-openstackclient==5.5.0 python-octaviaclient==2.3.0
----

[NOTE]
====
In the command prompt there will be visible indicator, that virtualenv is in
use - here it will be additional `(venv)` string, as in the example above venv
is a name of the directory and the virtual env at the same time.
====

> Stay in the created environment during following procedure to be sure the

Reviewer 5: @maxwelldb everything below this point (based on this message) should start with:  `(venv) $`

> right python components are used.

Author: This section is new.

.Procedure

. On a command line, enter the following commands to set variables to cluster and Kuryr identifiers:

.. Set the cluster ID:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ CLUSTERID=$(oc get infrastructure.config.openshift.io cluster -o=jsonpath='{.status.infrastructureName}')

Reviewer 5: ``
```suggestion
(venv) $ CLUSTERID=$(oc get infrastructure.config.openshift.io cluster -o=jsonpath='{.status.infrastructureName}')
```

----

.. Set the cluster tag:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ CLUSTERTAG="openshiftClusterID=${CLUSTERID}"

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(venv) $ CLUSTERTAG="openshiftClusterID=${CLUSTERID}"
```

----
.. Set the router ID:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ ROUTERID=$(oc get kuryrnetwork -A --no-headers -o custom-columns=":status.routerId"|head -n 1)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(venv) $ ROUTERID=$(oc get kuryrnetwork -A --no-headers -o custom-columns=":status.routerId"|head -n 1)
```

----

. To create a Bash function that removes finalizers from specified resources, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ function REMFIN {

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(venv) $ function REMFIN {
```

    local resource=$1
    local finalizer=$2
    for res in $(oc get $resource -A --template='{{range $i,$p := .items}}{{ $p.metadata.name }}|{{ $p.metadata.namespace }}{{"\n"}}{{end}}'); do
        name=${res%%|*}
        ns=${res##*|}
        yaml=$(oc get -n $ns $resource $name -o yaml)
        if echo "${yaml}" | grep -q "${finalizer}"; then
            echo "${yaml}" | grep -v  "${finalizer}" | oc replace -n $ns $resource $name -f -

>         fi

Author: This was changed in favor of not using `jq`

    done
}
----
+
The function takes two parameters: the first parameter is name of the resource, and the second parameter is the
finalizer to remove. The named resource is removed from the cluster and its definition is replaced with copied data excluding the specified finalizer.

. To remove Kuryr finalizers from services, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ REMFIN services kuryr.openstack.org/service-finalizer

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(venv) $ REMFIN services kuryr.openstack.org/service-finalizer
```

----

. To remove all tagged {rh-openstack} load balancers from Octavia, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ for lb in $(openstack loadbalancer list --tags $CLUSTERTAG -f value -c id); do

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(venv) $ for lb in $(openstack loadbalancer list --tags $CLUSTERTAG -f value -c id); do
```

    openstack loadbalancer delete --cascade $lb
done
----

. To remove Kuryr finalizers from all KuryrLoadBalancer CRs, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ REMFIN kuryrloadbalancers.openstack.org kuryr.openstack.org/kuryrloadbalancer-finalizers

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(venv) $ REMFIN kuryrloadbalancers.openstack.org kuryr.openstack.org/kuryrloadbalancer-finalizers
```

----

. To remove the Kuryr service subnet from router, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ openstack router remove subnet $ROUTERID ${CLUSTERID}-kuryr-service-subnet

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(venv) $ openstack router remove subnet $ROUTERID ${CLUSTERID}-kuryr-service-subnet
```

----

. To remove the Kuryr service network, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ openstack network delete ${CLUSTERID}-kuryr-service-network

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(venv) $ openstack network delete ${CLUSTERID}-kuryr-service-network
```

----

. To remove Kuryr finalizers from all pods, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ REMFIN pods kuryr.openstack.org/pod-finalizer

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(venv) $ REMFIN pods kuryr.openstack.org/pod-finalizer
```

----

. To remove Kuryr finalizers from all `KuryrPort` CRs, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ REMFIN kuryrports.openstack.org kuryr.openstack.org/kuryrport-finalizer

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(venv) $ REMFIN kuryrports.openstack.org kuryr.openstack.org/kuryrport-finalizer
```

----
This will trigger deleting of the KuryrPort Custom Resources.

. To remove Kuryr finalizers from network policies, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ REMFIN networkpolicy kuryr.openstack.org/networkpolicy-finalizer

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(venv) $ REMFIN networkpolicy kuryr.openstack.org/networkpolicy-finalizer
```

----

. To remove Kuryr finalizers from remaining network policies, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ REMFIN kuryrnetworkpolicies.openstack.org kuryr.openstack.org/networkpolicy-finalizer
----

. To remove subports that Kuryr created from trunks, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ read -ra trunks <<< $(python -c "import openstack; n = openstack.connect().network; print(' '.join([x.id for x in n.trunks(any_tags='$CLUSTERTAG')]))")

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(venv) $ read -ra trunks <<< $(python -c "import openstack; n = openstack.connect().network; print(' '.join([x.id for x in n.trunks(any_tags='$CLUSTERTAG')]))")
```

> $ i=0

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(venv) $ i=0
```

> $ for trunk in "${trunks[@]}"; do

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(venv) $ for trunk in "${trunks[@]}"; do
```

    i=$((i+1))
    echo "Processing trunk $trunk, ${i}/${#trunks[@]}."
    subports=()
    for subport in $(python -c "import openstack; n = openstack.connect().network; print(' '.join([x['port_id'] for x in n.get_trunk('$trunk').sub_ports if '$CLUSTERTAG' in n.get_port(x['port_id']).tags]))"); do
        subports+=("$subport");
    done
    args=()
    for sub in "${subports[@]}" ; do
        args+=("--subport $sub")
    done
    if [ ${#args[@]} -gt 0 ]; then
        openstack network trunk unset ${args[*]} $trunk
    fi
done
----

. To retrieve all networks and subnets from `KuryrNetwork` CRs and remove ports, router interfaces and the network itself, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ mapfile -t kuryrnetworks < <(oc get kuryrnetwork -A --template='{{range $i,$p := .items}}{{ $p.status.netId }}|{{ $p.status.subnetId }}{{"\n"}}{{end}}')

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(venv) $ mapfile -t kuryrnetworks < <(oc get kuryrnetwork -A --template='{{range $i,$p := .items}}{{ $p.status.netId }}|{{ $p.status.subnetId }}{{"\n"}}{{end}}')
```

> $ i=0

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(venv) $ i=0
```

> $ for kn in "${kuryrnetworks[@]}"; do

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(venv) $ for kn in "${kuryrnetworks[@]}"; do
```

    i=$((i+1))
    netID=${kn%%|*}
    subnetID=${kn##*|}
    echo "Processing network $netID, ${i}/${#kuryrnetworks[@]}"
    # Remove all ports from the network.
    for port in $(python -c "import openstack; n = openstack.connect().network; print(' '.join([x.id for x in n.ports(network_id='$netID') if x.device_owner != 'network:router_interface']))"); do
        ( openstack port delete $port ) &

        # Only allow 20 jobs in parallel.
        if [[ $(jobs -r -p | wc -l) -ge 20 ]]; then
            wait -n
        fi
    done
    wait

    # Remove the subnet from the router.
    openstack router remove subnet $ROUTERID $subnetID

    # Remove the network.
    openstack network delete $netID
done
----

. To remove the Kuryr security group, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ openstack security group delete ${CLUSTERID}-kuryr-pods-security-group

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(venv) $ openstack security group delete ${CLUSTERID}-kuryr-pods-security-group
```

----

. To remove all tagged subnet pools, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ for subnetpool in $(openstack subnet pool list --tags $CLUSTERTAG -f value -c ID); do

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(venv) $ for subnetpool in $(openstack subnet pool list --tags $CLUSTERTAG -f value -c ID); do
```

    openstack subnet pool delete $subnetpool
done
----

. To check that all of the networks based on `KuryrNetwork` CRs were removed, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ networks=$(oc get kuryrnetwork -A --no-headers -o custom-columns=":status.netId")

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(venv) $ networks=$(oc get kuryrnetwork -A --no-headers -o custom-columns=":status.netId")
```

> for existingNet in $(openstack network list --tags $CLUSTERTAG -f value -c ID); do

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(venv) $ for existingNet in $(openstack network list --tags $CLUSTERTAG -f value -c ID); do
```

    if [[ $networks =~ $existingNet ]]; then
        echo "Network still exists: $existingNet"
    fi
done
----
+
If the command returns any existing networks, intestigate and remove them before you continue.

. To remove security groups that are related to network policy, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ for sgid in $(openstack security group list -f value -c ID -c Description | grep 'Kuryr-Kubernetes Network Policy' | cut -f 1 -d ' '); do

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
(venv) $ for sgid in $(openstack security group list -f value -c ID -c Description | grep 'Kuryr-Kubernetes Network Policy' | cut -f 1 -d ' '); do
```

    openstack security group delete $sgid
done
----

. To remove finalizers from `KuryrNetwork` CRs, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ REMFIN kuryrnetworks.openstack.org kuryrnetwork.finalizers.kuryr.openstack.org
----

> . If the your router *was not* created by the installer, enter the following command to remove the router:

Author: I've reshaped this a bit to indicate that in case router was created by installer, it shouldn't be touched

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. If the installer did not create your router, enter the following command to remove the router:
+
IMPORTANT: If the installer did create your router, do not remove the router.
```

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/ovn_kubernetes_network_provider/migrate-from-kuryr-sdn.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="nw-kuryr-cleanup_{context}"]
= Cleaning up resources after migration

> After migration from the Kuryr network plugin to the OVN-Kubernetes network plugin completes, clean up the resources that Kuryr created previously. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After migration from the Kuryr network plugin to the OVN-Kubernetes network plugin completes, clean up the resources that Kuryr created previously. 

NOTE: The clean up process relies on a Python virtual environment to ensure that the `openstacksdk` package version that you use supports tags for Octavia objects. If you are certain that your environment uses `openstacksdk` version 0.54.0 or higher, you can forego the virtual environment.
```

.Prerequisites

* You installed the {product-title} CLI, `oc`.
* You installed a Python interpreter.
* You installed the `openstacksdk` Python package.
* You installed the `openstack` CLI.
* You have access to the underlying {rh-openstack} cloud.
* You can access the cluster as a user with the `cluster-admin` role.

> [NOTE]
> ====
> At the time of writing when OCP16 is used, it includes ancient version of
> `openstacksdk` package, that does not support tags for Octavia objects. It is
> recommended to use either workstation with modern operating system with newer
> version of `openstacksdk` package or `virtualenv` and install appropriate
> version from link:https://pypi.org[pypi].
> ====
> 
> .Setup virtualenv
> 
> If you decide to use virtualenv, here is a quick guidance how to proceed.
> At the time of writing, minimal versions of the following OpenStack components
> has been used to fulfill cleaning procedure:
> 
> - openstacksdk 0.54.0
> - python-openstackclient 5.5.0
> - python-octaviaclient 2.3.0
> 
> Newer versions should also work, although there is a tiny chance for
> incompatibilities. If you have issues, either downgrade to version mentioned
> above or consult individual component documentation and/or changelog for
> details.
> 
> To set up cleanup environment, create virtualenv, update pip and install needed
> components:
> 
> [source,terminal]
> ----
> $ python3 -m venv /tmp/venv
> $ source /tmp/venv/bin/activate
> (venv) $ pip install pip --upgrade
> (venv) $ pip install openstacksdk==0.54.0 python-openstackclient==5.5.0 python-octaviaclient==2.3.0
> ----
> 
> [NOTE]
> ====
> In the command prompt there will be visible indicator, that virtualenv is in
> use - here it will be additional `(venv)` string, as in the example above venv
> is a name of the directory and the virtual env at the same time.
> ====
> 
> Stay in the created environment during following procedure to be sure the
> right python components are used.
> 
> .Procedure

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.Procedure

. Create a clean-up Python virtual environment:

.. Create a temporary directory for your environment. For example, with `venv`:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ python3 -m venv /tmp/venv
----
+ 
`venv` is used in all clean up examples.

.. Enter the virtual environment. For example:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ source /tmp/venv/bin/activate
----

.. Upgrade `pip` in the virtual environment by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ pip install pip --upgrade
---- 

.. Install the required Python packages by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ pip install openstacksdk==0.54.0 python-openstackclient==5.5.0 python-octaviaclient==2.3.0
----
```

@gryf @imatza-rh Thoughts on this? I'm wondering whether it's necessary to specify venv or just direct the reader to use whichever virtual environment tool they like. Shouldn't matter as long as the packages get installed, right?

It also seems safe to drop the packages installed in the venv instructions from the prerequisites.

Reviewer 4: +1

Right, the goal is to have an environment with the appropriate packages, and it doesn't matter if it's venv (or which kind of virtual environment tool).

On the other side, we should keep the note, so the user knows he can keep using his env if it supports tags for Octavia objects.
```
[NOTE]
====
At the time of writing when OCP16 is used, it includes ancient version of
`openstacksdk` package, that does not support tags for Octavia objects. It is
recommended to use either workstation with modern operating system with newer
version of `openstacksdk` package or `virtualenv` and install appropriate
version from link:https://pypi.org[pypi].
====
```

Author: I agree with @imatza-rh here. Let's leave the note which explains why we are using virtual env for the procedure, and what are the other options.

Author: I leaved the note about reasons and rearranged beginning of the section as you suggested, @maxwelldb

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/ovn_kubernetes_network_provider/migrate-from-kuryr-sdn.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="nw-kuryr-cleanup_{context}"]
= Cleaning up resources after migration

After migration from the Kuryr network plugin to the OVN-Kubernetes network plugin completes, clean up the resources that Kuryr created previously.

> NOTE: The clean up process relies on a Python virtual environment to ensure
> that the python packages version that you use supports tags for Octavia
> objects. If you are certain that your environment uses a minium `openstacksdk`
> version 0.54.0, `python-openstackclient` version 5.5.0 and
> `python-octaviaclient` version 2.3.0, you can forego the virtual environment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[NOTE]
====
The clean up process relies on a Python virtual environment to ensure
that the python packages version that you use supports tags for Octavia
objects. If you are certain that your environment uses a minium `openstacksdk`
version 0.54.0, `python-openstackclient` version 5.5.0 and
`python-octaviaclient` version 2.3.0, you can forego the virtual environment.
====
```

For multiple lines.

        if echo "${yaml}" | grep -q "${finalizer}"; then
            echo "${yaml}" | grep -v  "${finalizer}" | oc replace -n $ns $resource $name -f -
        fi
    done
}
----
+
The function takes two parameters: the first parameter is name of the resource, and the second parameter is the
finalizer to remove. The named resource is removed from the cluster and its definition is replaced with copied data excluding the specified finalizer.

. To remove Kuryr service `service-subnet-gateway-ip`, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ if $(oc get -n openshift-kuryr service service-subnet-gateway-ip 2>/dev/null >/dev/null); then
    oc get -n openshift-kuryr delete service service-subnet-gateway-ip
fi
----

. To remove Kuryr finalizers from services, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ REMFIN services kuryr.openstack.org/service-finalizer
----

. To remove all tagged {rh-openstack} load balancers from Octavia, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ for lb in $(openstack loadbalancer list --tags $CLUSTERTAG -f value -c id); do
    openstack loadbalancer delete --cascade $lb
done
----

> . To remove Kuryr finalizers from all KuryrLoadBalancer CRs, enter the following command:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. To remove Kuryr finalizers from all `KuryrLoadBalancer` CRs, enter the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ REMFIN kuryrloadbalancers.openstack.org kuryr.openstack.org/kuryrloadbalancer-finalizers
----

> . To remove openshift-kuryr namespace, enter the following command:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. To remove the `openshift-kuryr` namespace, enter the following command:
```

+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ REMFIN networkpolicy kuryr.openstack.org/networkpolicy-finalizer
----

. To remove Kuryr finalizers from remaining network policies, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ REMFIN kuryrnetworkpolicies.openstack.org kuryr.openstack.org/networkpolicy-finalizer
----

. To remove subports that Kuryr created from trunks, enter the following commands:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ read -ra trunks <<< $(python -c "import openstack; n = openstack.connect().network; print(' '.join([x.id for x in n.trunks(any_tags='$CLUSTERTAG')]))")
(venv) $ i=0
(venv) $ for trunk in "${trunks[@]}"; do
    i=$((i+1))
    echo "Processing trunk $trunk, ${i}/${#trunks[@]}."
    subports=()
    for subport in $(python -c "import openstack; n = openstack.connect().network; print(' '.join([x['port_id'] for x in n.get_trunk('$trunk').sub_ports if '$CLUSTERTAG' in n.get_port(x['port_id']).tags]))"); do
        subports+=("$subport");
    done
    args=()
    for sub in "${subports[@]}" ; do
        args+=("--subport $sub")
    done
    if [ ${#args[@]} -gt 0 ]; then
        openstack network trunk unset ${args[*]} $trunk
    fi

> done

Reviewer 3: One command per step. 

Is it possible to combine this?

(venv) $ i=0
(venv) $ for kn in "${kuryrnetworks[@]}"; do
    i=$((i+1))
    netID=${kn%%|*}
    subnetID=${kn##*|}
    echo "Processing network $netID, ${i}/${#kuryrnetworks[@]}"
    # Remove all ports from the network.
    for port in $(python -c "import openstack; n = openstack.connect().network; print(' '.join([x.id for x in n.ports(network_id='$netID') if x.device_owner != 'network:router_interface']))"); do
        ( openstack port delete $port ) &

        # Only allow 20 jobs in parallel.
        if [[ $(jobs -r -p | wc -l) -ge 20 ]]; then
            wait -n
        fi
    done
    wait

    # Remove the subnet from the router.
    openstack router remove subnet $ROUTERID $subnetID

    # Remove the network.
    openstack network delete $netID
done
----

. To remove the Kuryr security group, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ openstack security group delete ${CLUSTERID}-kuryr-pods-security-group
----

. To remove all tagged subnet pools, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ for subnetpool in $(openstack subnet pool list --tags $CLUSTERTAG -f value -c ID); do
    openstack subnet pool delete $subnetpool
done
----

> . To check that all of the networks based on `KuryrNetwork` CRs were removed, enter the following commands:

Author: done.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/ovn_kubernetes_network_provider/migrate-from-kuryr-sdn.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="nw-kuryr-cleanup_{context}"]
= Cleaning up resources after migration

After migration from the Kuryr network plugin to the OVN-Kubernetes network
plugin, you must clean up the resources that Kuryr created previously.

[NOTE]
====

> The clean up process relies on a Python virtual environment. This ensure that the python packages version you use support tags for Octavia objects. If you are certain that your environment uses a minium `openstacksdk` version 0.54.0, `python-openstackclient` version 5.5.0 and `python-octaviaclient` version 2.3.0, you do not need the virtual environment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The clean up process relies on a Python virtual environment to ensure that the package versions that you use support tags for Octavia objects. You do not need a virtual environment if you are certain that your environment uses at minimum:
* `openstacksdk` version 0.54.0
* `python-openstackclient` version 5.5.0
* `python-octaviaclient` version 2.3.0 
```

====

.Prerequisites

* You installed the {product-title} CLI (`oc`).
* You installed a Python interpreter.
* You installed the `openstacksdk` Python package.
* You installed the `openstack` CLI.
* You have access to the underlying {rh-openstack} cloud.
* You can access the cluster as a user with the `cluster-admin` role.

.Procedure
. Create a clean-up Python virtual environment:

> .. Create a temporary directory for your environment. For example, with the `/tmp/venv`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.. Create a temporary directory for your environment. For example:
```

The minimal versions of the following OpenStack components need to be used to 
fulfill cleaning procedure:

- openstacksdk 0.54.0
- python-openstackclient 5.5.0
- python-octaviaclient 2.3.0

Newer versions should also work, although there is a tiny chance for
incompatibilities. If you have issues, either downgrade to version mentioned
above or consult individual component documentation and/or changelog for
details.

> ====

Reviewer 3: Works for me. We try to avoid this type of information in procedure steps, anyway.

    openstack loadbalancer delete --cascade $lb
done
----

. To remove Kuryr finalizers from all `KuryrLoadBalancer` CRs, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ REMFIN kuryrloadbalancers.openstack.org kuryr.openstack.org/kuryrloadbalancer-finalizers
----

. To remove the `openshift-kuryr` namespace, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ oc delete namespace openshift-kuryr
----

. To remove the Kuryr service subnet from the router, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ openstack router remove subnet $ROUTERID ${CLUSTERID}-kuryr-service-subnet
----

. To remove the Kuryr service network, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ openstack network delete ${CLUSTERID}-kuryr-service-network
----

. To remove Kuryr finalizers from all pods, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ REMFIN pods kuryr.openstack.org/pod-finalizer
----

. To remove Kuryr finalizers from all `KuryrPort` CRs, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ REMFIN kuryrports.openstack.org kuryr.openstack.org/kuryrport-finalizer
----

> This will delete the KuryrPort Custom Resources.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This command deletes the `KuryrPort` CRs.
```

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/ovn_kubernetes_network_provider/migrate-from-kuryr-sdn.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="nw-kuryr-cleanup_{context}"]
= Cleaning up resources after migration

After migration from the Kuryr network plugin to the OVN-Kubernetes network

> plugin, you must to clean up the resources that Kuryr created previously.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
plugin, you must clean up the resources that Kuryr created previously.
```

----

.. Set the cluster tag:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ CLUSTERTAG="openshiftClusterID=${CLUSTERID}"
----
.. Set the router ID:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ ROUTERID=$(oc get kuryrnetwork -A --no-headers -o custom-columns=":status.routerId"|head -n 1)
----

. Create a Bash function that removes finalizers from specified resources by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ function REMFIN {
    local resource=$1
    local finalizer=$2
    for res in $(oc get $resource -A --template='{{range $i,$p := .items}}{{ $p.metadata.name }}|{{ $p.metadata.namespace }}{{"\n"}}{{end}}'); do
        name=${res%%|*}
        ns=${res##*|}
        yaml=$(oc get -n $ns $resource $name -o yaml)
        if echo "${yaml}" | grep -q "${finalizer}"; then
            echo "${yaml}" | grep -v  "${finalizer}" | oc replace -n $ns $resource $name -f -
        fi
    done
}
----
+
The function takes two parameters: first parameter is name of the resource, while second one is the finalizer to remove.
The named resource is removed from the cluster and its definition is replaced with copied data, excluding the specified finalizer.

> . Clean up Kuryr related resources.

Reviewer 3: I do agree that it's okay to eliminate this step and move its children up a level--the module title does indicate that we're cleaning up resources, anyway.

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/ovn_kubernetes_network_provider/migrate-from-kuryr-sdn.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="nw-kuryr-cleanup_{context}"]
= Cleaning up resources after migration

> After migration from the Kuryr network plugin to the OVN-Kubernetes network plugin completes, clean up the resources that Kuryr created previously.

Author: It's rather mandatory stage. Without cleaning up cluster will be kind of broken, api will work, but removing/recreating certain resources might be "impossible". I'd change it to `you should`.

> After migration from the Kuryr network plugin to the OVN-Kubernetes network plugin completes, clean up the resources that Kuryr created previously.

Reviewer 3: In that case, I'd go with "must" here.

> [NOTE]

Author: Well, I can make it all in one line, although I use to format it certain column length, as it is easier to make diffs, especially in a case of merge conflict.

====
The clean up process relies on a Python virtual environment to ensure
that the python packages version that you use supports tags for Octavia
objects. If you are certain that your environment uses a minium `openstacksdk`
version 0.54.0, `python-openstackclient` version 5.5.0 and
`python-octaviaclient` version 2.3.0, you can forego the virtual environment.
====

.Prerequisites

* You installed the {product-title} CLI, `oc`.
* You installed a Python interpreter.
* You installed the `openstacksdk` Python package.
* You installed the `openstack` CLI.
* You have access to the underlying {rh-openstack} cloud.
* You can access the cluster as a user with the `cluster-admin` role.

.Procedure
. Create a clean-up Python virtual environment:

> .. Create a temporary directory for your environment. For example, with `venv`:

Reviewer 6: Ohhh I gotcha, yeah I have little experience venv and wasn't sure the best way to describe it. I do think having the path is a great way to describe it

+
[source,terminal]
----
$ python3 -m venv /tmp/venv
----
+

> `venv` is used in all clean up examples.

Author: Please, see my explanation above.

.. Enter the virtual environment. For example:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ source /tmp/venv/bin/activate
----
.. Upgrade `pip` in the virtual environment by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ pip install pip --upgrade
----
.. Install the required Python packages by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ pip install openstacksdk==0.54.0 python-openstackclient==5.5.0 python-octaviaclient==2.3.0
----

> . On a command line, enter the following commands to set variables to cluster and Kuryr identifiers:

Author: Again, those shell variables are mandatory and crucial for the subsequent commands to run.

.. Set the cluster ID:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ CLUSTERID=$(oc get infrastructure.config.openshift.io cluster -o=jsonpath='{.status.infrastructureName}')
----

.. Set the cluster tag:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ CLUSTERTAG="openshiftClusterID=${CLUSTERID}"
----
.. Set the router ID:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ ROUTERID=$(oc get kuryrnetwork -A --no-headers -o custom-columns=":status.routerId"|head -n 1)
----

. To create a Bash function that removes finalizers from specified resources, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ function REMFIN {
    local resource=$1
    local finalizer=$2
    for res in $(oc get $resource -A --template='{{range $i,$p := .items}}{{ $p.metadata.name }}|{{ $p.metadata.namespace }}{{"\n"}}{{end}}'); do
        name=${res%%|*}
        ns=${res##*|}
        yaml=$(oc get -n $ns $resource $name -o yaml)
        if echo "${yaml}" | grep -q "${finalizer}"; then
            echo "${yaml}" | grep -v  "${finalizer}" | oc replace -n $ns $resource $name -f -
        fi
    done
}
----
+

> The function takes two parameters: the first parameter is name of the resource, and the second parameter is the

Author: I'm not sure if I get it right. How about:
```adoc
The function takes two parameters: first parameter is name of the resource, while second one is the finalizer to remove. 
The named resource is removed from the cluster and its definition is replaced with copied data excluding the specified finalizer.
```

> The function takes two parameters: the first parameter is name of the resource, and the second parameter is the

Reviewer 6: I like your re-write as well. Thank you!

finalizer to remove. The named resource is removed from the cluster and its definition is replaced with copied data excluding the specified finalizer.

> . To remove Kuryr finalizers from services, enter the following command:

Author: It would be long nevertheless, even if I place all of the cleaning commands under one "and now let's clean those up!" section ;). All the steps are necessary, unfortunately.

> . To remove Kuryr finalizers from services, enter the following command:

Reviewer 6: Yeah, I was just trying to think of a possible way to clean up the clean up section 😄. But you're right, its a very long procedure anyway

+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ REMFIN networkpolicy kuryr.openstack.org/networkpolicy-finalizer
----

. To remove Kuryr finalizers from remaining network policies, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ REMFIN kuryrnetworkpolicies.openstack.org kuryr.openstack.org/networkpolicy-finalizer
----

. To remove subports that Kuryr created from trunks, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ read -ra trunks <<< $(python -c "import openstack; n = openstack.connect().network; print(' '.join([x.id for x in n.trunks(any_tags='$CLUSTERTAG')]))") && \
i=0 && \
for trunk in "${trunks[@]}"; do
    i=$((i+1))
    echo "Processing trunk $trunk, ${i}/${#trunks[@]}."
    subports=()
    for subport in $(python -c "import openstack; n = openstack.connect().network; print(' '.join([x['port_id'] for x in n.get_trunk('$trunk').sub_ports if '$CLUSTERTAG' in n.get_port(x['port_id']).tags]))"); do
        subports+=("$subport");
    done
    args=()
    for sub in "${subports[@]}" ; do
        args+=("--subport $sub")
    done
    if [ ${#args[@]} -gt 0 ]; then
        openstack network trunk unset ${args[*]} $trunk
    fi
done
----

> . To retrieve all networks and subnets from `KuryrNetwork` CRs and remove ports, router interfaces and the network itself, enter the following command:

Author: all network which KuryrNetwork points to, have subnets, ports and so on, and all of those were created by Kuryr :)

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * networking/ovn_kubernetes_network_provider/migrate-from-kuryr-sdn.adoc

:_content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="nw-kuryr-cleanup_{context}"]
= Cleaning up resources after migration

After migration from the Kuryr network plugin to the OVN-Kubernetes network plugin completes, clean up the resources that Kuryr created previously.

NOTE: The clean up process relies on a Python virtual environment to ensure
that the python packages version that you use supports tags for Octavia
objects. If you are certain that your environment uses a minium `openstacksdk`
version 0.54.0, `python-openstackclient` version 5.5.0 and
`python-octaviaclient` version 2.3.0, you can forego the virtual environment.

.Prerequisites

* You installed the {product-title} CLI, `oc`.
* You installed a Python interpreter.
* You installed the `openstacksdk` Python package.
* You installed the `openstack` CLI.
* You have access to the underlying {rh-openstack} cloud.

> * You can access the cluster as a user with the `cluster-admin` role.

Author: Yes, they are accurate.

The function takes two parameters: the first parameter is name of the resource, and the second parameter is the
finalizer to remove. The named resource is removed from the cluster and its definition is replaced with copied data excluding the specified finalizer.

. To remove Kuryr service `service-subnet-gateway-ip`, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----

> (venv) $ if $(oc get -n openshift-kuryr service service-subnet-gateway-ip 2>/dev/null >/dev/null); then

Reviewer 4: How about using the &> redirection operator to redirect both stdout and stderr to /dev/null?
`oc get -n openshift-kuryr service service-subnet-gateway-ip &>/dev/null`

Author: good point. I'll change that.

done
----

. To remove finalizers from `KuryrNetwork` CRs, enter the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ REMFIN kuryrnetworks.openstack.org kuryrnetwork.finalizers.kuryr.openstack.org
----

> . If the Cluster Network Operator created your router, enter the following command to remove the router:

Reviewer 3: @gryf Any changes incoming with respect to this?

> . If the Cluster Network Operator created your router, enter the following command to remove the router:

Author: @maxwelldb I'd rather postpone this change to the next release if @imatza-rh is okay with that.

> . If the Cluster Network Operator created your router, enter the following command to remove the router:

Reviewer 4: Sure, np from my side.

+
[source,terminal]
----
(venv) $ REMFIN kuryrnetworks.openstack.org kuryrnetwork.finalizers.kuryr.openstack.org
----

> . If the installer did not create your router, enter the following command to remove the router:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
. To remove the Kuryr router, enter the following command:
```
^ The command is already checking the condition.
